---
layout: post
title: Hexago
subtitle: A forray into MCTS
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/hexago/thumb.png
share-img: /assets/img/hexago/thumb.png
category: project
tags: [MCTS, board-game, hexago]
---
Thumbnail created by vectorsmarket15 - Flaticon

### [Link](https://github.com/energy-in-joles/HexaGo) to Repository

### Project Overview ###

As a child, I really enjoyed playing [Pentago](https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/19841/pentago). With the 6x6 board that came with the game, I liked to come up with new games to play with my friends. One such game I coined _Hexago_, a simple chess-inspired game where both players started with 3 rows of pawns and aimed to be the first to get a pawn to the opponent's last row.

In the early stages of learning Python, I decided to give building this game a shot. Given that it was a novel game, I wanted to build an AI that I could play against, and perhaps use it to find new strategies of play. In the end, I managed to build the game, but struggled to come up with a meaningful CPU algorithm to play against. 

In this project, I wanted to revisit and rewrite my noob code, while adding a [Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monte_Carlo_tree_search) algorithm AI adapted from [ai-boson](https://github.com/ai-boson/mcts). The [MCTS explanation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UXW2yZndl7U&ab_channel=JohnLevine) by John Levine was a great help in building the AI.

### How it works ###

I built the script to run within the terminal/IDE, with the board changing perspective whenever it was either white (represented by "O") or black's (represented by "X") turn to move. Users move by inputting an algebraic notation, where the notation format follows chess exactly. The game offers both multiplayer and cpu, which can be controlled as a terminal parameter or within _main.py_. I also exposed certain parameters of the MCTS algorithm within main.py for users to adjust the exploitation-exploration ratio of the AI or to visualise the AI's score for each move.

An example of the first two turns in a versus game:
```
=== white's turn ===
  a b c d e f
6 X X X X X X
5 X X X X X X
4 X X X X X X
3 O O O O O O
2 O O O O O O
1 O O O O O O

Available moves: ['axb4', 'bxa4', 'bxc4', 'cxb4', 'cxd4', 'dxc4', 'dxe4', 'exd4', 'exf4', 'fxe4']
Choose a move: axb4

=== black's turn ===
  f e d c b a
1 O O O O O O
2 O O O O O O
3 O O O O O .
4 X X X X O X
5 X X X X X X
6 X X X X X X

Available moves: ['axb4', 'cxb4', 'a3', 'axb3', 'cxb3', 'cxd3', 'dxc3', 'dxe3', 'exd3', 'exf3', 'fxe3']
Choose a move:
```
And an example of white winning, where white wins with a pawn in _a6_:
```
=== white's turn ===
  a b c d e f
6 X X X X X X
5 X O . X X X
4 . X X . . X
3 . . O O X X
2 O O O O O O
1 O O O O O O

Available moves: ['bxa6#', 'bxc6#', 'cxb4', 'd4', 'dxc4', 'a3', 'b3', 'dxe3', 'exf3', 'fxe3']
Choose a move: bxa6#

  f e d c b a
1 O O O O O O
2 O O O O O O
3 X X O O . .
4 X . . X X .
5 X X X . . X
6 X X X X X O

```

### What I Learnt and Future Improvements ###

Successfully implementing the AI felt like a huge milestone in my coding journey, as I managed to venture into the world of decision-making search algorithms. This exercise also enabled me to improve the structure of my old code, where I could tidy my badly written functions and wrap them properly in a class. As one of my first projects trying to create a production level terminal script, I also sharpened by error handling and terminal paramater managements skills.

In the actual Pentago board game, the board is actually constructed out of 4 revolving 3x3 boards, where turning the board was part of each move. This would be something interesting to implement in future iterations of my game!